---
layout: post
title:  "Sunday Paella"
categories: [ Jekyll ]
image: assets/images/demo1.jpg
---

Paella always seems to be an elevated idea in this world of pizza, bagels and Chinese take-out. For me, the culinary definition of “being elevated”, in New York City’s context, depends on the ease of consumption while in motion. Despite being hailed as foodies’ Mecca, New York City doesn’t offer enough Spanish outposts. 

Paella is elevated not because it’s a European baby, but because it’s literally impossible to eat while walking on the road and dodging tourists. Also “being elevated” equates “being pricey”, which is probably why it became a regional and cultural staple in the first place. I believe that most cuisines with long history had humble beginnings. The dish should feed economically and its ingredients easy to gather locally. 

The recipe labelled as authentic must have been compromising to make the best use of changing catches from the early days. Cooking techniques must have been tested by trials and errors through generations of chefs and their evolving cookware. If paella travelled across time, it could tell me so much of this twisted journey. 

Now snap myself back to the kitchen. Paella is actually not difficult to prepare. There are so many ingredients going into one pan that the expanded margin of error is quite first-timer friendly. In fact, there are only three essentials you really need to watch out -

The rice, the broth, and the time.

You need to pick Bombay rice, or sometimes labelled as “Paella rice”. This little short grain has so much ability to hold solid shape after soaking liquids and flavors. That being said, you still need to pay attention to rice-water-ratio and adjust heat when necessary. It’s ready when you see no extra liquid and the rice appears translucent only with a little dot in the middle. That little dot is the indicator of al-dente. Remember to keep it.

Next is the broth. I don’t think there should be set rules on how to prepare the broth. However, it’s nice to be consistent with your show-off ingredients and only work to enhance their presence. If I am to make seafood paella, the broth should be simmered with fish bones, lobster shells, clams, mussels or any shellfish in season. If I want to feature chorizo or chicken, I would have seared some meat or sausage as fundamentals. Of course, there are occasions you have to do cross-over, and that’s exactly what I did because I never plan ahead. There would be a lot of deja vu of such because of my perpetually spontaneous instinct. 

Anyway, I did the seafood paella with bacon. Bacon is also Paul’s favorite. He loves it so much that he probably already married the juiciest strip in one of his delightful dreams. According to his recount, the “careful planning” dated back three weeks ago even though I didn’t think it started until we jumped out of couch and announced: “Let’s cook”. As we realized chicken broth was missing from our “careful planning”, we pulled out two slices of thick-cut bacon scissored to the inch. Pieces dropped into the pan like meaty snowflakes. A few minutes later, endless aroma and flavor erupted from the golden pieces. They bubbled and swirled around the pan like a whirlwind. Next thing we knew, the pan was coated in a concentrated dose of umami, unmatched by any chicken stock you can find.

Then I followed the instruction on the recipe to sauté fine-diced vegetables to form a base, and added in the next batch only when the last was tenderized with heat and the gentle touch of a spatula. So I have to be patient and work with time. You can rely on the clock but don’t feel uncomfortable to ditch it when your stove or pan need more time. As the base was teeming with vibrant colors and aromas, I poured in the rice on top of the base and gave it a nice stir. Before the heat dried out the mixture, we poured in water slowly to submerge the base, then left it untouched. I turned to observe and play with heat and water until it was time to wedge seafood into the rice. I used defrosted seafood medley from Trader Joe’s but wished I could get catches of the day from the fishmonger. Maybe I can give another try in spring or summer. As I floated that thought, the paella was ready to finish up. We stayed close to the pan for the last few minutes. We’d like to get to a point where seafood was just cooked through and the rice was still al-dente.

Here was our first paella with quite a few tweaks. I normally could give a fair score to my own cooking just because the cooking process itself ease unreasonable feeling of hunger and allow an unbiased judging. But I decided to judge less and feel more. 

We can always “elevate" an experience by appreciating how much we enjoy a new thing and share it with whom we see many more to come.

